feat: introduce observed, observed_macros, observed_testing crates (#611)
microsoft/oxidizer: crates/observed/DESIGN.md

# observed - Telemetry Framework Design

`observed` is a collection of crates that provide a telemetry frontend solution.

## Motivation

Rust services and libraries need structured telemetry that is:

- **Decoupled** - emit sites do not depend on specific exporters or the OpenTelemetry SDK.
- **Privacy-safe by construction** - classified data cannot reach exporters without passing through a redaction engine.
- **Easy to use** - telemetry should not repel people from using it.
- **Unified telemetry** - a single event definition can produce any combination of logs, metrics, and traces without duplication.
- **Propagation of enrichment** - attributes propagate semi-automatically through sync and async code.
- **Richer enrichment** - OTel attributes are limited to key-value pairs, and they lose additional information about an event and its dimensions, such as taxonomy.
- **Library-friendly** - library crates can emit telemetry using their telemetry pipeline without requiring callers to perform any setup.

## Requirements

> 1. **Typed, compile-time validated events/enrichment.** Every telemetry event is a Rust struct.

Reviewer: [Copilot speaking]

## OX611-SYN-002 — [P2] Separate the implemented API contract from proposed architecture

**Impacted locations**:
- `crates/observed/DESIGN.md:19-23`
- `crates/observed/DESIGN.md:41-65`
- `crates/observed/DESIGN.md:162-174`
- `crates/observed/DESIGN.md:190-217`
- `crates/observed/DESIGN.md:243-296`
- `crates/observed/DESIGN.md:332-340`
- `crates/observed/FEATURES.md:5-7,38-42`
- `crates/observed/src/emit.rs:5-28`
- `crates/observed/src/sink/id.rs:7-31`
- `crates/observed/src/context/mod.rs:13-31,103-109`
- `crates/observed_testing/tests/derive_event.rs:4-12,825-827`
- `crates/observed_testing/src/mock_processor.rs:526-529`
- `crates/observed/examples/event_type_matching.rs:139-142,206-209`

The designated design reference mixes requirements, planned facilities, stale syntax, and implemented behavior without marking their status. It presents `SinkPipeline`, owned providers, severity prefilters, sink inheritance, scoped sink registration, cached processing instructions, runtime signal overrides, and trace routing as current technical details, while the head implements explicit `Sink` values containing processors and explicit `Sink::composite` fan-out. The public `emit!` documentation repeats the nonexistent registered/scoped-emitter model.

Several direct contradictions remain in the current contract:
- `DESIGN.md` says two `SinkId`s are equal only for the same instance and later promises pointer identity, while `SinkId::eq` and `Hash` use label contents.
- `FEATURES.md` says `EventProcessor::is_interested` defaults to `true`, while the trait requires every implementation to define it.
- `DESIGN.md` requires native OpenTelemetry `Context`/span propagation, while `FEATURES.md` explicitly says there is no OTel Context dependency and `Transfer` stores only enrichment state.
- The design's signal table still says every listed scenario logs, `FEATURES.md` says at least one signal is required, and the macro intentionally accepts signal-less events.
- Changed test and helper documentation still refers to nonexistent `#[derive(Event)]`/`#[log]` syntax.

**Reproducible reasoning**: Compare the current `Sink` representation and constructors in `sink/core.rs` with the design's `SinkPipeline` and scoped-registration sections. The `emit!` expansion performs one call through the supplied sink, and `FEATURES.md` says there is no ambient/global state. Compare the `SinkId` prose with its label-based `PartialEq`/`Hash`, the claimed `is_interested` default with the required trait method, and the OTel-context requirement with `Transfer`'s sole `EnrichmentTransfer` field. Finally, compare `test_no_signal` in the macro implementation with the “at least one signal” feature claim and search the changed examples/tests for the remaining legacy syntax.

**Consequence**: Consumers and destination authors can design against lifecycle, identity, propagation, routing, and registration facilities that do not exist or behave differently, while contributors receive contradictory guidance about valid event declarations. Because these documents are presented as the crate's design and feature contract, the ambiguity is especially risky for a new public API.

**Recommended action**: Rewrite the current-state sections around the implemented `Sink`, `Sink::composite`, label-based `SinkId`, required `EventProcessor` methods, enrichment-only `Transfer`, and log/metric metadata. State in the macro documentation that `emit!` dispatches only through its supplied sink and that composites provide fan-out. Move unimplemented facilities into a clearly labelled future-work section. Align the signal matrix, no-signal grammar, OTel-context promise, and remaining legacy syntax with the chosen contract, then add contract-level documentation tests or source-linked checks for accepted macro grammar and routing semantics.

**References**:
- `crates/observed/src/sink/core.rs:27-37,68-176,397-430`
- `crates/observed/src/processing/processor.rs:16-42`
- `crates/observed/FEATURES.md:13-15`
- `crates/observed_macros/src/event.rs:1295-1303`

Author: 🤖 **Clawpilot here**, replying on behalf of @eshutov.

Fixed. `DESIGN.md` presented `SinkPipeline`, sink inheritance and scoped registration as current fact; none of it exists. The document was rewritten around what actually ships, with the unbuilt work moved under an explicit *Planned, not implemented* table so a reader can no longer mistake intent for contract.

Seven contradictions were corrected in the process, the sharpest being `SinkId`: documented as pointer identity while `PartialEq` compares labels. `FEATURES.md` was corrected too — the `is_interested` default and the at-least-one-signal claim were both wrong — along with the `emit!` docs and stale references to `#[derive(Event)]` / `#[log]`.

---
The change lands in the internal ox-sdk repo (PR 5481996). It will reach this repo when @eshutov republishes the `observed` crates from internal.

- The event is disabled.
- Low severity: severity pre-filtering skips event construction entirely - no field extraction, no allocation, no redaction call.
- Signal-level: if an emission results only in a metric, you should not pay the cost of logging - and vice versa.

1. **Enrichment crates.** A dedicated crate (e.g., `auth_attributes`, `http_context`) can define a public enrichment type reusable by other crates.

1. **Flat composition.** Multiple attribute sources (HTTP context, auth claims, tenant info,
   infrastructure metadata, tracing context) must compose without **nesting** closures.
   Five attribute providers should not produce five levels of indentation.

1. **Events and enrichment are runtime agnostic.** Everything should work independently of any
   async runtime. There might be some additional requirements for how to propagate context
   between tasks/threads.
   NOTE: That also includes propagation of native OTel `Context`/spans in case a library uses the `opentelemetry` crate directly.

1. **Zero-cost bypass for fields that don't require redaction.** Fields annotated with `unredacted` skip the redaction engine entirely (no `RedactedDisplay` call, no allocation).

>    Also applicable to fileds that have `DataClass` not requiring any redaction.

Reviewer 2: **[language]** Typo: "fileds" should be "fields".

```suggestion
Also applicable to fields that have a `DataClass` not requiring any redaction.
```

Author: 🤖 Fixed in `67a9446d` (applied your suggestion, including the missing article in "a `DataClass`").

## Core Concepts

### Sink

A **Sink** is a composable event dispatcher identified by a `SinkId`. It is the unit of telemetry configuration - each sink independently owns:

- One or more **pipeline** instances (each with its own OTel providers, `RedactionEngine`, and `ProcessingInstructions`).
- An optional **severity prefilter**.
- An **enrichment isolation** flag.

A new instance of a sink can be created from an existing one. It will inherit the setup of the previous sink and add new pipelines/instructions on top.

Sinks are activated in the current scope via RAII guards. `emit!()` always accepts a sink as the first argument and fans out to all active sinks,
each processing the event independently through its pipelines. Processing instructions are generated at compile time by `#[event(...)]`,
cached per event type on first emission, and can be overridden at runtime. See [Sinks and Keys](#sinks-and-keys) for the full technical details.

### Signal Routing: How Events Become Logs, Metrics, and Traces

An event can produce any combination of signals defined by its schema.

#### Logs

> 1. **By default, every event always produces a log record.** By default, all attributes are included in logs, but there is a way to opt-out.

Reviewer 2: **[doc-consistency]** "By default, every event always produces a log record" contradicts `FEATURES.md` (severity attribute is *optional*, "at least one signal is required") and the macro crate's own support for events with **no** signal at all (see the `test_no_signal` test / `no_signal.snap` snapshot, and the doc comment in `event.rs` describing a valid event that "produces no log or metric output"). Suggest rewording to make clear a log is only produced when a severity attribute is present:

```suggestion
1. **A log record is produced only when a severity attribute is present.** When present, all attributes are included in logs by default, but there is a way to opt-out per field.
```

Author: 🤖 Applied your suggestion in `67a9446d`. You're right that it contradicted both `FEATURES.md` and the `no_signal` test — an event with no severity attribute produces no log.

   metric value), only dimension opt-in.

1. An instance of a metric instrument is created automatically when a metric is emitted for the first time.
   Instruments are stored as thread-local instances (we need to check if OTel is already doing this).

1. Every "pipeline" has its own instance of a metric instrument that publishes results to its own target.

In summary, the routing is determined by annotations on the event struct:

| Scenario | Log? | Metric? | Trace? |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| No instrument attribute | Yes | No | If span active |
| One instrument attribute | Yes | Yes (one instrument) | If span active |
| Multiple instrument attributes | Yes | Yes (per instrument) | If span active |

## Technical details

### Event properties

Each event uses per-signal attributes at the struct level; both `#[log(...)]` and the instrument attributes are optional.

| Annotation | Effect |
| --- | --- |
| `#[event(name = "...")]` | **Required.** Declares the canonical event name used for routing and identification. Add `disabled` (`#[event(name = "...", disabled)]`) to make the event opt-in: by default no processor receives it; processors must explicitly opt in. |

> | `#[log(severity = <ident>, message = "...")]` | Declares the event as a log. `severity` is one of `trace`, `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`, `fatal`. `name` defaults to the event name; `message` is optional. |

Reviewer 2: **[doc-consistency]** This table row documents a nonexistent `#[log(severity = <ident>, message = "...")]` attribute syntax. The actual macro API uses standalone severity attributes `#[info("...")]`, `#[warning("...")]`, `#[error("...")]`, `#[debug("...")]`, `#[trace("...")]`, `#[fatal("...")]` — there is no `#[log(...)]` attribute. `FEATURES.md` correctly describes the real syntax ("an optional severity attribute (`#[info]`, `#[warning]`, ...)"). Also, the severity list here says `warn` but the actual token/enum variant is `warning` (see `crates/observed/src/severity.rs`). Suggested fix:

```suggestion
| A severity attribute — `#[trace]`, `#[debug]`, `#[info]`, `#[warning]`, `#[error]`, or `#[fatal]` (optionally with a message: `#[info("...")]`) | Declares the event as a log. `name` defaults to the event name; the message is optional. |
```

Author: 🤖 Correct, that syntax never existed. Applied your suggestion in `67a9446d`, including `warn` → `warning`.

While fixing it I found the same row also had `#[event(name = "...")]`, which is wrong too — the name is positional, `#[event("...")]`. Fixed that alongside.

> | `#[metric(kind = <Kind>[, name = "..."][, field = ...])]` | Declares an event-level metric instrument, where `<Kind>` is `counter`, `updown_counter`, `gauge`, or `histogram`. `name` defaults to the event name. `kind = counter` may be fieldless and records `1` per emission; the others require `field = <ident>` naming the struct field that supplies the metric value. |

Reviewer 2: **[doc-consistency]** This row documents a nonexistent `#[metric(kind = <Kind>[, name = "..."][, field = ...])]` attribute syntax. The real macro API uses the instrument kind directly as the attribute name (`#[counter]`, `#[updown_counter(field)]`, `#[gauge(field)]`, `#[histogram(field)]`) with the value field passed positionally, not via a generic `#[metric(kind = ...)]` wrapper — `FEATURES.md` documents the real syntax correctly. Suggested fix:

```suggestion
| One of `#[counter(...)]`, `#[updown_counter(field, ...)]`, `#[gauge(field, ...)]`, `#[histogram(field, ...)]` | Declares an event-level metric instrument. `name` defaults to the event name. A bare `#[counter]` may be fieldless and records `1` per emission; the others require a leading positional field naming the struct field that supplies the metric value. |
```

Author: 🤖 Applied your suggestion verbatim in `67a9446d`.

This turned out to be systematic rather than isolated: I swept the three crates and found 13 more stale references to the pre-`#[event(...)]` API across 9 files — `#[log(name = ...)]` in `metadata/log.rs`, `#[metric(kind = counter)]` in `mock_processor.rs`, and `#[event(name = "...")]` in several examples and tests. All corrected in the same commit.

| `#[if_none(drop)]` | For `Option` fields: omit the field entirely when the value is `None` | Only valid on `Option` fields |
| instrument `field = ...` | Names the field whose value IS the metric value for the instrument | The referenced field must not also be a metric dimension; `kind = counter` requires unsigned, `kind = updown_counter` signed |
| `#[data_class(<expr>)]` | Data-classification expression; wraps the value in `Sensitive::new(value, expr)` before redaction | Mutually exclusive with `#[unredacted]` |
| `#[unredacted]` | Bypass redaction; the type must implement `Into<Value>` | Mutually exclusive with `#[data_class(...)]` |

### Sinks and Keys

#### SinkId

A `SinkId` is a lightweight, `Copy` identifier for a sink. It wraps a `&'static str` label and can be defined as a `const` / `static` item.
Two keys are equal only if they represent the same instance.

#### Sink

A **Sink** is a composable event dispatcher identified by a `SinkId`. It is the unit of telemetry configuration - each sink independently controls:

> - **Pipelines** - A sink holds ~~zero~~ one or more "pipeline" instances (there is no upper limit).

Reviewer 2: **[language]** Leftover strikethrough editing artifact "~~zero~~ one or more" — elsewhere (Core Concepts > Sink) the same fact is stated plainly as "one or more pipeline instances". Suggest removing the strikethrough markup.

```suggestion
- **Pipelines** - A sink holds one or more "pipeline" instances (there is no upper limit).
```

Author: 🤖 Fixed in `67a9446d` — applied your suggestion, which also makes it consistent with the Core Concepts > Sink wording.
